IS 340 Final Term Paper
Alia Afeef, IS 340 Spring 2023
Introduction
This paper will serve as an introduction to “Fresh Foods,” an open source project I am proposing. Fresh Foods is a platform that aims to solve two problems with one platform–the excessive food waste issue in the United States and the dearth of resources faced by stretched-thin food banks in the United States. These two problems are of dire importance to solve, and by connecting these two groups, I would aim to resolve this problem. Fresh Foods will serve as an intermediary to connect local grocery stores who experience overstock and food waste and local food banks that are not having their current needs met, either because of lack of donations or increased food pantry shoppers due to inflation and other economic factors. 
This is a problem that would best be solved by creating a platform employing open source principles because it is a nationwide problem. We aim to create a deeper sense of community and nurture close connections between grocery stores and food banks, hopefully creating a greater symbiotic sense of community that could extend beyond the donations facilitated by our platform. Because the mission of our project is so community-oriented, and the issue we aim to solve is at a nationwide scale, I believe that open-source style management is best. 
Platform Features and Timeline
Developing the Fresh Foods platform to eventually scale up to nationwide implementation is the final long-term goal, and in order to eventually accomplish this I have planned the development of the platform in stages, with each 6 month stage containing different goals. In this section, I will detail the timeline and goals of each phase.
Phase One
In the first phase of development, approximately the first 6 months of our project, our goals are to establish our initial group of collaborators as well as develop communication channels for our project. 
We reach out to potential collaborators, interested in helping create and develop this platform. We will initially focus on recruiting collaborators in the Urbana-Champaign community—those who are affiliated with the University and also other individuals in the community who demonstrate interest. 
In this first phase of our project, we will also begin a Discord server to serve as the centralized hub for communication, creating specific channels to organize discussion surrounding particular issues. 
Phase Two
This second phase of our project is also set to take approximately 6 months, and we will have worked on Fresh Foods for 12 months at the completion of this phase. Our goals in Phase Two are to create a database of local food pantries and grocers to inquire about their interest in potentially piloting this program and to also publish the initial base platform of Fresh Foods. 
We will have collaborators who are interested in our work, but may have limited coding and web development skills. In order to still involve collaborators of different skill levels, these collaborators with minimal technical skills will first work on creating a database of local grocers and food banks, and then contacting the appropriate persons within those organizations and record their interest. 
The initial plan for the creation of this platform is to roll it out as a pilot program within the Central Illinois area, possibly initially just within Champaign county. In the initial pilot stage of the Fresh Foods platform, we will only include features essential to allow food banks to advertise their needs and a function for grocery stores to assign themselves to a certain product request. The idea for the Fresh Foods platform is based off of wedding or baby shower registry websites, where the food banks will have an aggregated list of all of their different product desires (including details like the quantity of products) similar to how an individual on a registry would add items to a gift/wish list and grocery stores can assign themselves to fulfill either a certain amount of a product needs or fulfill the complete request, similar to how one would fulfill a registry request. The wish list page and fulfillment abilities will be the core of the platform, and the first essential features we implement and will eventually build off of in later stages.
I would like to implement this first stage of the platform as quickly as possible, and focusing on just rolling this out to a smaller initial audience still allows us to evaluate the usability and feedback from our first stage of initial users, while also not overwhelming ourselves with the volume of feedback and troubleshooting that would come with a larger roll out and initial test audience.
Phase Three
The third phase of our project is slated to take another 6 months, and at the end of this phase, we will have worked on this project for 18 total months. The main goal of Phase Three will be to build out the platform to be implemented in other regions of the United States as well as react and adapt to any of the feedback we received during the course of our pilot program rollout. 
In the second stage of the platform, I would like to implement the platform beyond our initial, smaller pilot region. In order to execute this, there would have to be additional features built out on the platform. Some features that would be necessary for expansion are tagging features–on each individual food bank’s wish list page, we would include the ability to tag the kinds of products, any affiliations of the food bank, and the geographic region. By adding these different tags, we would allow grocers to filter through the different wish lists and only browse through the food banks whose location is a match and whose product needs are aligned with the excess at the grocery store.
Ongoing
Throughout all of these initial phases of our project—and beyond, as we work on this project long-term—we will work on two key goals, one external and one internal. 
On the external side, in order to maintain the utility and relevance of the platform, we want to push out consistent updates and bug fixes to the platform. These will be pushed out on a reliable schedule, so users encountering an issue are reassured by the fact that they know an update and improvement is always on the way.
On the internal side, we want to maintain the connection and respect within our community of collaborators. In order to accomplish this we want to maintain weekly check-ins with collaborators on Discord and monthly video conferences with our senior collaborators and project leadership. We would also implement a Code of Conduct in our community, and routinely evaluate any collaborators that we believe may be in violation of this code. 
Purpose
According to the US Department of Agriculture, approximately 30-40% of the United States’ food supply is wasted every year–and approximately 30% of that food supply waste is attributed to retail and consumer loss (USDA, 2023). Because the United States total food supply is so large, this loss amounts to billions of dollars and billions of pounds of consumable food waste. In contrast to this seemingly excess of our food supply, there is a significant amount of Americans that experience food insecurity. The economic disruption of the Covid-19 pandemic has also exacerbated this problem, “Before the pandemic, the number of families experiencing food insecurity — defined as a lack of consistent access to enough food for an active, healthy life — had been steadily falling. But now, as economic instability and a health crisis takes over, new estimates point to some of the worst rates of food insecurity in the United States in years,” (Silva, 2020). This demonstrates the severity of both the excessive food supply waste and increased need at food pantries within the United States, validating the necessity of my proposed platform. 
Additionally, I have chosen to emphasize the local connection in this platform is two-fold. First, the ethos of the project is to eliminate waste, support community-building, and support sustainability—trying to create a local-based solution would eliminate the distance between suppliers and food banks, both decreasing the cost and wasteful emissions of the transaction. Second, due to the research I read on the topic of food bank efficiency leading me to discover that food banks that implement local access food distribution and have well developed relationships with suppliers experienced the most success in feeding and sustaining their community during periods of disruption, like during the Covid-19 pandemic (Bublitz et al., 2020). 
Target Audience
Our target audience for collaborators will change as our project evolves. As I discussed in the Platform Features and Timeline section, we will first seek collaborators within the Urbana-Champaign community. 
There are multiple reasons we are choosing to focus on recruiting collaborators within the Urbana-Champaign community. Primarily, we are focusing on individuals within the community because our initial focus will be on creating a pilot program within the Urbana-Champaign community. The time commitment of the first stages of the project will be much greater compared to the level of time commitment after the platform is created and our focus turns more towards maintenance and troubleshooting versus the high level of time commitment when creating this platform from the ground up. Therefore, in the first stages of platform development, it is important for our first group of collaborators to have a vested interest in this community because it will incentivize them to maintain participation within the project. Additionally, the Urbana-Champaign has incredible human capital in terms of computer science and web development talent, and many individuals with this level of human capital and talent are students. This project can be advertised as a dual benefit position to students: a way to add to their resume and display their skills outside of the classroom to potential employers and to connect with the community of Urbana-Champaign beyond just the University and campus community. 
As our project expands beyond our pilot program, we would like to broaden our collaborator community to any individuals interested in our project. We are extremely interested in working with collaborators with a variety of backgrounds, skill levels, and perspectives. We believe that developing an evolving and inclusive community of collaborators is incredibly important to maintaining the longevity and relevancy of the platform. As the interest of individual collaborators will ebb and flow, we believe that cultivating an inclusive and welcoming community for any interested collaborators will mitigate any potential gaps in skills as the commitment and involvement of specific collaborators will change.
Access and License
Maintaining openness in our project is extremely important to the goals and mission of our project. We want to solve a nationwide problem, and because of the scale and magnitude of the problem we are trying to solve, we want individuals who share the desire to solve this problem to have access to our source-code and be able to use it as they see fit.
We want our code to be open-source, and will therefore make it available to the public on GitHub. Despite keeping our source code publicly available on GitHub, we do want to impose certain restrictions on the code to protect and maintain the integrity of the original source code. We strongly encourage interested individuals to download our source code and remix, modify, and play with the code from their individually downloaded copy of the source code—but in order to protect the code against any unwanted modifications, we will only make it downloadable and not modifiable. 
Additionally, to protect our code, we will be implementing the MIT License for our code. The MIT License was selected for our project because it is a permissive enough license that individuals can modify and remix our code, but it also provides a form of protection against any malicious or unwanted use of our code. 
Collaborator Community
Engagement and Continuity
Fresh Foods is an open-source platform that will involve a community of collaborators to build and maintain. In our initial phases of development, we intend to limit our collaborator community to only those in the region we will be implementing the pilot program–those in the Urbana-Champaign region. As I previously discussed, these individuals are targeted because they have a connection and vested interest in the community who’s problem we are seeking to solve. An additional strength focusing on the Urbana-Champaign community as the talent pool for initial collaborators is that it will allow us to have a high level of engagement with these collaborators. Something we would like to do to promote collaborator engagement is to host in-person meetings to touch base, as well as encourage collaborators to get involved with one another and the community we are seeking to help. In order to facilitate that involvement and engagement, we would try to host events to volunteer at different low-income serving nonprofits in the community. This would give our first collaborators an increased sense of belonging and connection with the community that our platform will initially be designed to serve. We hope that by making engagement with our first local collaborators a priority, this priority will translate to maintaining a high level engagement with our collaborators as the collaborator community grows and we pivot to more online engagement events. 
As our collaborator base increasingly moves to be geographically diverse and our connection more online based, we will have two engagement focuses. One would be to encourage connection between the collaborator community—we would employ social channels on our Discord Server and also have monthly puzzle or coding challenges, rewarded with small prizes, to help build teamwork and technical skills. We would also like to have our collaborators engage in volunteer work in their community, aligned with our project's mission. I believe that an important part of maintaining continuity and engagement with our collaborators in our project is having them engage in community-building work, as that will truly help them understand the extent that local cooperation and support can help uplift the community–which is the belief at the core of the project.
References
Bublitz, Melissa G., et al. “Pandemic Reveals Vulnerabilities in Food Access: Confronting Hunger Amidst a Crisis.” Journal of Public Policy &amp; Marketing, vol. 40, no. 1, 2020, pp. 105–107, https://doi.org/10.1177/0743915620929998. 
“Food Loss and Waste.” USDA, www.usda.gov/foodwaste/faqs. Accessed 8 May 2023. 
“How Does a Wedding Registry Work?: The Expert’s Guide - Zola Expert Wedding Advice.” Zola.Com, 26 Aug. 2020, www.zola.com/expert-advice/how-does-a-wedding-registry-work-the-experts-guide. 
“The Open Source Definition.” Open Source Initiative, 22 Feb. 2023, opensource.org/osd/. 
Silva, Christianna. “Food Insecurity In The U.S. By The Numbers.” NPR, 27 Sept. 2020, www.npr.org/2020/09/27/912486921/food-insecurity-in-the-u-s-by-the-numbers. 
