## Connecting Students to RSO's
Roy Khanal, Spring 2023


### Abstract     

 The goal of this paper is to deliver a proposal that aims to bridge the gap between RSO’s (Registered Student Organizations) on the University of Illinois campus by connecting them based on similar interests, hobbies, goals, etc. It talks about the use of an open source dating/communication platform called CSR (Connecting Student’s and RSO’s) for students and organizations that will allow them to easily reach out to one another and act as a platform meant to seamlessly connect any information either party needs. The use of open source and why is highlighted in this paper and used in conjunction to any relevant principles. Finally this paper goes into a condensed down process of how the development and implementation of this platform can begin and how it can be optimized for the university and its students. 
 
 ### Introduction 
 The University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign houses roughly 50,000 students and among those students are also about a 1000 different registered Organizations.Organizations range from anything like a spongebob fan base club to clubs that focus on mechanical engineering and various different aspects of it, and for students to find the right one sometimes is more than difficult  especially since joining RSO’s are known to be one of the best ways to explore various interest and hobbies while in college. Students are looking for ways through which they can find a similar group of like minded people that they can group with and/or network with. On the other hand RSO’s on campus can also sometimes struggle to stay running and/or have people come to events that they are working hard to put together.. Niche RSO’s that have goals that are not reflected by a lot of students can have a difficult time retaining membership and active participation in their events. While events like quad days and social media try and help bring various organizations into the light, they simply aren’t enough and the university RSO website is also bland, providing little to no information. There is a void to be filled between the students and organizations that could be filled with a platform that is easy to use and understand and one that is constantly keeping up with the changes that is happening in and outside the university life. 

 ### Purpose
 The purpose of this project is aimed towards creating an open source platform that aims to connect students to various organizations on campus by highlighting their similar interests and goals. This project will also act as a one stop platform for all organizations on campus that will allow them to enroll, communicate, and advertise to students all in the same place. This platform is intended to eliminate the hours of time students need to go through the list of organizations they are interested in and then spend days trying to see if it is something they will fit into and also enjoy being a part of.  The primary goal of this project is to create a space for students that will allow them to find opportunities on campus that will help them build solid connections with different organizations and people that will help them in their personal, social and/or professional life through the help of networking. Another main goal of this project is to also be a centralized platform where organizations can easily reach out to prospective new members, communicate with the entire organization, and also advertise their event and meetings to the university as a whole so that they can alert any interested students. Essentially this platform will help to bridge the gap between the students and organizations, allowing them to flourish through a centralized communication platform. 

 ### Intended Audience
The primary audience for this project are university students since these are the people who will make up all of the platform's users. This platform is intended towards them because it is created with the need to fulfill a gap between them and other students/organizations and do this with little effort on their part. It is them that are looking to reach out to organizations that contain people with similar interests/goals to them and that could potentially help throughout their university life and onwards. The other group of the intended audience, while also are university students, are more so intended to be considered as an organization and it is them that the platform is created for so that they can reach out to the students mentioned prior and have them come into their organization as a member or participant. This platform ensures that there is no communication cut off between both sets of audiences. 
 
 ### Structure
The platform would first require all university organizations to create their own section into the organization directory within the platform. This section would include basic things such as organization name and description of organization, but is would also include other things such as a series of questionnaire that is intended to pick out specific characteristics about the organization, it would included a spot for list of events/meetings held recently along with events that are most attended,  and it would also include a section requesting photos of various aspects of organization life that can be expected by a new recruit within the organization. On the other hand students looking to join an organization would need to enter their own information within the student directory and also fill out a questionnaire that would then be used to narrow down the list of RSO’s they could be interested in based on the characteristics found in the questionnaire answers. The platform would then help with communication between the students and a potential organization they want to be part of with the help of messaging within the platform. Another aspect of the platform is also to be able to communicate with all members in the organization and to be able to advertise any events to the entire student directory as a whole. This would be done through various layers that have access provided based on the status of students in the directory.  
 
 ### Why open source
Open source is a type of software that does not restrict the use and sharing of the program and instead welcomes others to contribute and use it if needed. This kind of software is freely available to all and can be used without the risk of infringing any sort of law or license. Open source has a lot of benefits and over the years we have seen popularity in them due to these benefits. Open source is a good idea for this project for a couple of different reasons but they can be narrowed down to 4 main ones; Community, transparency, flexibility, and cost. 
Due to the size of the Urbana-Champaign community, having an open source software can be a huge benefit since the community itself can create and curate the platform. This allows for the platform to have a diverse knowledge base and hence make sure that is not overlooking any one idea or view. The open source nature also allows for the whole community to constantly look out for any potential errors in the code and also allow for new additions and improvements to be implemented in a much more efficient manner. Transparency is another benefit of open source software since it allows for users to have an easened sense of mind when using the platform as the code is visible to anybody and any malicious intent cannot be hidden within it. Students are especially wary of fraudulent websites and the potential risk of exposing private information so having a transparent source code goes a long way in motivating students to try the platform. Flexibility goes hand in hand with community in regards to one of the benefits of open source. Since this platform is intended to be tailored to the use of university students, having it be open source allows for the students to adapt the platform as needed. Finally cost is a major selling factor of an open source software. The cost is essentially split between everyone using the platform and helps eliminate the cost of paying to use a closed platform that could be very expensive to use. 
 
 ### Process
The whole project starts by building a community within the university that is interested in working on this project. This group will consist of different people that will focus on different aspects like development, interface, marketing, content, etc. The next step will then be to brainstorm potential ideas for the platform. This can include everything from the core idea of the project to little elements that make the user interface that much better. This phase is crucial in deciding what is added initially to the platform and what is not, it will also require the input of not just people who are helping create the platform but also those of the community since they will be the ones who will be primarily using it. The team can also decide if they are going to use another open source code to jumpstart the project and use it as a baseline to get started. The next step will be to decide how they are going to collaborate on this project and ensure that everybody working on it is on the same page while also contributing their part without issue. This will allow for a seamless team communication and for the team to be knowledgeable on every aspect of the project. Roadmapping will be the next step which will create a general idea of how the timeline is going to work and what deadlines the project has in order to keep track of everything as well as finish the project in the most effective way possible. After the project has been curated and has a working model, it will then have to be thoroughly tested and tried to ensure that there are not many issues with the platform. The true test will be after it is released and students are playing around with everything. Finally, the platform will have to be introduced and shared with the students and will also have to include teaching everyone how the platform is intended to be used and how it can help them. The upkeep and maintenance of the platform can be done through various forums and platforms with the help of anyone who would like to contribute. 

 ### Community 
The effectiveness of this platform depends on how well it is received by the students and how much they are willing to use it. One of the very first steps that need to be taken to effectively introduce the platform is by creating a community before the platform has even been released. This community can have constant updates on the status of the program as well as information on any news regarding any updates or delays. They will also be able to keep track of the timeline and release of the platform which will create a hype around the platform. Once the platform is out, the team will have to bring it to the awareness of students through various different platforms and marketing. The next step will be to make sure that the platform is running smoothly and that the users on that platform are happy with what they are using. They need to see that this platform is effective in connecting them to various organizations and events on campus that they can potentially benefit by joining or attending. The team will also have to be ready for any potential crashes or fault within the code that will negatively impact a student's experience within the platform. Any error or crashes will have to be quickly dealt with so that students know the platform is safe and also constantly monitored. Finally the team will have to entice organization on campus to start making use of the platform so that they can benefit their event or organization while also helping jumpstart the effectiveness of the platform.
 
 ### Potential Downsides
Like everything that we interact and use there are downsides to everything and this platform is no different. One of the biggest points of concern that this platform will arise is security. Students will be skeptical using a platform that will hold a lot of information about them and one that is very newly released. They will be wary of having their information stolen and will have to ensure that their data is in a safe and monitored platform. Another major issue this platform may face is the lack of interest from students. Students may initially find the platform to simply be another social media platform disguised to be one that appears to help them. They will also be unsure if the platform will really be that much more useful than what they already have available to them. So this initial lull of not being used may be hard to get the platform going. This also relates to another potential downside within the platform. Since the platform is open source and relies on the community to keep it running in it’s optimal state while also being constantly updated and adapted according to student’s use, it may prove difficult to keep things on track as there is not much use within the platform. 
           
 ### Conclusion      
A platform that can allow students to effortlessly ingrain themselves within one of the most beneficial parts of university life is something that will be attractive to a lot of students and organizations on campus. The open source nature of the platform in a way also reduces any barrier of entry among students, be it cost to security. This allows the platform to flourish as more students gravitate towards it and start using it like intended. Organizations too will find the platform to be incredibly beneficial to them since not only does the platform allow them to increase their presence on campus and recruit new members easily, it also allows them to have one platform shared between everyone to communicate to their own members as well as the rest of the university students. Building a platform using open source also allows for the user interface to be very intentional and useful to both students and organization since the people helping develop and adapt it are students themselves, this way it is not hard to navigate or scary to use. This platform has the ability to create a tight knit community as a whole in the university since students are on the same page about everything that is going on in the campus. Despite it not being a news platform or an informational one, any big event on campus will affect all organizations and organizations will adapt accordingly hence also allowing for the students on campus to adapt to it. This can be a great resource to many students during their university life and while this platform can be curated for UIUC, the open source code can be used by universities and communities to adapt it for their own use so that students everywhere can avoid the hurdle of finding somewhere they can belong. 

 ### References     
References
ADCIV. (n.d.). Open Collaborative Design. Retrieved May 8, 2023, from https://web.archive.org/web/20190629170541/http://adciv.org/Open_collaborative_design#Free_riders
ERIC. (2007). Collaborative Learning: Group Work and Study Teams. Retrieved from http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/search/detailmini.jsp?_nfpb=true&_&ERICExtSearch_SearchValue_0=EJ757139&ERICExtSearch_SearchType_0=no&accno=EJ757139
 
 
