## Open-Source Community for UX Design
Joey Hartz, IS 340 Spring 2023, https://joeyhartz.com

### Abstract
User experience design is a quickly growing field, but significantly lacks in a community for sharing open-source, structured information, resources, and questions. This paper explores the issue of this lack of information, resources, and questions available for those in the user experience design field, and proposes the solution of an open-source, user-based forum style community that promotes the sharing of resources, questions and answers, and more. By establishing a forum style community, user experience designers, as well as other related fields who may find user experience design information helpful, can collaborate to create and share valuable information and resources. This paper looks at the models of already established niche community forums, such as Stack Overflow and Reddit, to understand the basis of those established platforms’ infrastructure. The goal of the open-source community for user experience design is to empower designers with accessible knowledge, foster collaborative work, and further innovation in the field. Providing an open-source platform for this community to live within has the potential to revolutionize the way that user experience designers learn, collaborate, and work, which will have significant benefits for the user experience design industry.

### Introduction    
In a quickly evolving technological society, the world has found itself with an abundance of information and resources - so many that it is hard to keep up. User experience, which is also commonly referred to as ‘UX’, ‘Human-Computer Interaction’, ‘Interaction Design’, and more, is not a spared victim in this problem. Since the industry of user experience design is so new still, many disparate sources of information and resources have been created, but they are often difficult to both find and keep track of. A structured and centralized forum-based community for the sharing of user experience design information and resources presents the ideal solution to this problem.

### Purpose
With the rate that the user experience design industry has grown, it is no surprise that a community has emerged in many different ways and mediums - YouTube videos are probably at the forefront of this community, but you also see dedicated user experience design blogs, social media content creators, and more. The one thing that still lacks in this community is a centralized location for structured and open-source information, resources, and questions. By establishing a forum-based community, user experience designers, as well as other individuals in related fields (e.g. application development) who may find user experience related information helpful, can collaborate to create and share valuable information and resources that continue to drive the user experience design industry forward. Overall, the purpose of this community is to empower user experience designers with accessible knowledge, to foster collaborative work, and to continue further innovations in the industry.

### Existing Platforms
#### Reddit
Reddit is a widely recognized online forum-based community platform, similar to the concept proposed here. While it certainly isn’t as niche in general, it does provide space for niche topics through theme-based communities called “subreddits”. Users still submit content, which can be everything from regular text to links, photos, videos, and more. Each of the pieces of content submitted to a subreddit is subject to moderation by the specific moderator(s) of that subreddit, and any user of Reddit can establish a subreddit. It has a higher level of flexibility than the proposed user experience design community, since users can create a subreddit for any topic they may find interesting. Within each subreddit, specific features are implemented that are intended to encourage community building and engagement, such as a voting system, karma, and awards, that allow any users of the platform to provide rating and feedback to both the user and the content they’ve created for the platform. This can make the process of moderation easier as well, since it is easier to spot the troublesome pieces of content and the users behind them. While the scale that Reddit has is intriguingly complex, it is too much for what is needed for this community. Concepts like a “subreddit”, however, could be interesting in the segmentation of different types of content that feed into the user experience design community.
#### Stack Overflow
Stack Overflow is takes on a more niche model of online community - even a bit more than is trying to be accomplished through the user experience design community. The primary purpose of the platform is to enable users to ask and answer questions that are related to software development or programming in general. In comparison to Reddit, there is less flexibility in creating new topics, but you do have the ability to utilize existing tags to organize the content for filtering and search. More often than not, questions and information stray away from being generalized and are very hyper-specific. More often than not, a user will ask how to perform a task, or post their code snippets to ask why a certain function may not be behaving properly, and the answering user will provide a code snippet and explanation for how they did something. There are still other features implemented for engagement, similar to what Reddit has, such as a voting system, user reputation, and badges. The moderation on this platform is conducted by users who have gained a sufficient reputation to have gained access to do so, which is a very similar approach to moderation the user experience design community will take.

### Community
The relatively new industry of user experience design has peaked interests far and wide - while the concept isn’t new, the landscape as we know it is. Some are hobbiests and only seek out information for their own interests, while others are building careers in user experience and need the information to successfully and efficiently do their work. With such a variety, it makes for a very large community, yet it is scattered and disparate. Similar to other areas of design, or even the software development, there is a variety of those who work alone in a “vacuum” versus those who are highly collaborative and connected. Networks are difficult to build, and take an immense amount of time that most people don’t have. Given that this is a fully user-driven community, it will bring together all groups of people - professionals, hobbiests, enthusiasts, instructors, mentors, and more. Casting such a wide net will build a strong community, and really a network, of anyone at any level who is interested in the topics or industry of user experience.

### Collaboration
Collaboration comes in many different forms. The most notable form is the contribution of information. Information may look like general industry trends, statistics about average compensation for jobs, or potential opportunities. Another form of collaboration may look like the curation of resources, such as reusable design components, style and accessibility guides, or templates. Obviously, there is also direct collaboration on both personal and professional projects - direct contributions to specific pieces of work. While this may not occur on the community platform itself, it would more than likely come as a result of it. All of these forms of collaboration take the general model of Reddit, because they come in many different forms that are semi-structured. They don’t necessarily have to take one specific shape, and don’t have to live in one specific place. Finally, and the most notable would be the question & answer model, which is most similar to Stack Overflow. While there is some variability in content, it comes in a highly structured format and is typically done in a similar fashion. For the maintenance of the community forum as a platform, anybody can submit bugs, issues, feedback, and recommendations that may be used to improve the platform. Given that the platform is intended for a single source of publish, however, it does not seem feasible to let others contribute to the code, or create their own forks to modify without the potential for the platform to break.

### Governance
With a forum-driven community like this, the expectation is that almost every aspect is driven by the users. They are responsible for generating and curating the content, not only for their benefit, but for the benefit of other users as well. Due to this, the users are the primary stakeholders of the platform, which is what makes it truly open-source. Most ideally, the structure of the content would take on a less flexible version of how Reddit operates - the main “Reddit” would be the user experience design community as a whole, however, each different topic of content would be organized into “subreddits”. While tags and categories may still be necessary for features like filtering and searching from the very top level, the “subreddit” organization method will create a clean and well organized architecture of information that is easily navigable. However, with great collections of information and resources comes great responsibility. Therefor, there has to be a certain level of moderation that is maintained with the content of the platform. Moderators may be decided amongst particularly engaged or knowledgable individuals on the platform, such as top contributors and subject matter experts (SMEs). More than likely, similar to how Reddit does their “subreddits”, the SMEs for each topic of content would take on a role of moderation for that specific topic. The true technical product ownership for this community forum could be based on a team of vetted, highly-skilled volunteers who are responsible for contributing to the platform. Since the organization structure as well as the members of this team can change very frequently, it is of utmost importance to keep a high level of documentation, management, and moderation on the platform to ensure that transitions take place smoothly.

### Strategy
The idea of building a highly-scalable and powerful web application today has never been as easy as it is, yet, choosing the right technical stack has never been so challenging due to the amount of options available. There are, however, certain libraries and frameworks that have bcome relatively standard in the web application development industry. The first of these is the front-end framework React.js, a library of JavaScript that allows for quick and replicable development of lightweight user interface components. Even though it makes use of the traditional technologies that you would use for front-end development like HTML5 and CSS, you get the functionality and logical aspects of JavaScript to build a highly scalable, dynamic web page. On the back-end framework is Node.js, which is another library of JavaScript that is specifically meant for building scalable and efficient network-based applications. It is the ideal platform to create a server-side computing piece to a larger website, which is ultimately to provide a better user experience by reducing the latency for the website user. It shifts any necessary computing power away from the user client’s local machine and onto the server, which are much better equipped for handling tasks that require a large amount of computing power. For a database, the obvious choice has to be an SQL-based database. Despite the growing popularity of NoSQL databases (e.g. MongoDB), an online forum like this would need a certain level of relational capabilities - the primary benefit of an SQL-based database. This will make it significantly easier to establish which contents are similar and should be organized together, as just a single example. Finally, for DevOps, Microsoft Azure is an unmatched ecosystem in the software development marketplace. It has so many built-in functionalities and additions that it can all be contained within a single space. Additionally, Microsoft’s enterprise-level security features make it appealing to prevent possible breaches of private data in a forum that is so heavily user-driven. Atlassian products such as Bitbucket, Confluence, and Jira could all be used for management of the project. While Github is certainly a popular industry choice for version control and code repositories, many enterprise-level organizations are still wary of the vulnerabilities there are in protecting sensitive code that the public should not have direct access to. Given that this project is focused on open-source content, and not open-source platform code, it makes the most sense to go with the most secure platform. Additionally, it integrates into the same ecosystem that Confluence and Jira are on, which will streamline the process of project and issue management significantly. Each platform is able to exchange information quickly and efficiently, which works extremely well when you have a team of software developers, designers, product managers, and content managers all making contributions at the same time. Since a forum-based community has the ability to be extremely dynamic, everything will change fast, and also break fast. Agile methodology seems to be the best option here, working in true sprints to address bugs and issues, implement feedback, and make improvements to the platform. While the exact type of license that would be assigned to the content on the platform is unclear, it would likely fall under the scope of one or more of the Creative Commons licenses. The user would agree that their work is subject to the use or modification by others, given that the purpose of the content is to drive collaboration, but credit must be provided to the original author. Additionally, the user would retain the ownership of the original piece of content, and not necessarily the platform.

### Conclusion      
It is relatively clear that while current platforms exist that are capable of supporting a user experience design community, the overall features and focus are either not niche enough, or too niche to be of real value. The solution to this growing demand is to create a platform based on the already established models of successful platforms that is better adapted to enable user experience designers to receive real value through a centralized and structured community for information, resources, and questions. The unique opportunity here is to take the many mediums of content that is being generated throughout various platforms, and create this forum-based community to create a one-stop-solution. As a result, there would be significant leaps forward in the way that user experience designers throughout the field continue to learn, transfer knowledge, and collaborate with one another for the greater good of the industry.

### References     
Gray, C. M., & Kou, Y. (2019). Co-producing, curating, and defining design knowledge in an online practitioner community. CoDesign, 15(1), 41–58. https://doi-org.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/10.1080/15710882.2018.1563193

Moutidis, I., & Williams, H. T. P. (2021). Community evolution on Stack Overflow. PLoS ONE, 16(6), 1–23. https://doi-org.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/10.1371/journal.pone.0253010

Node.js. (n.d.). About | Node.js. https://nodejs.org/en/about

React. (n.d.). https://react.dev/

Reddit. (n.d.). https://www.redditinc.com/

Stack Overflow. (n.d.). https://stackoverflow.co/

Vella, M. (2015). Reddit Reboots. TIME Magazine, 186(3), 46–50.

Wong, G. K. W., Li, Y. K., & Lai, X. (2021). Visualizing the learning patterns of topic-based social interaction in online discussion forums: an exploratory study. Educational Technology Research & Development, 69(5), 2813–2843. https://doi-org.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/10.1007/s11423-021-10040-5
